September 2023 (#297)
tc39/tc39-notes: meetings/2023-09/september-27.md

DE: We held a community call on September 20th and got a bunch of interesting feedback, so the notes will be posted on the -- in the repository, but we went through a number of interesting conceptual questions and I’m looking forward to having more community calls in the future.

DE: The ongoing technical work is around the grammar: there is nothing to do with runtime semantics because it’s type erasure! It’s just as if they were comments. We’re studying the implications of the flexible grammar. WH gave some feedback about the "token soup" approach, where in the context of a type (e.g. after a `:` sometimes) you could just have any “soup of tokens” within those parentheses/brackets, matching the nesting, and that would be treated as part of the type. We’ve been identifying and fixing technical problems with the grammar. There are some ambiguities raised previously, some more ambiguities that we found later. And we’re making progress on a more concrete grammar variant.

NRO: Some major things were, for example, type parameters in function calls, because TS uses this `f<T>()` operator that, like, just is very much ambiguous with the javascript syntax 

> due of comparison operators. And a solution to the proposal is probably going to use `f::<T>()`. This is not necessary in every case, such as in functional declarations, but it’s necessary in some cases in function calls, in some cases like arrow function expressions it might be needed. We’re still 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
due of comparison operators. And a solution to the proposal is probably going to use `f::<T>()`. This is not necessary in every case, such as in function declarations, but it’s necessary in some cases in function calls, in some cases like arrow function expressions it might be needed. We’re still 
```

KG: I agree we should do only erasure semantics. There is no viable path to runtime types here.

DE: WH, what do you think about this topic?

WH: It’s the wrong question to ask.

DE: In what sense?

WH: Why are you asking me?

DE: Because you previously expressed interest in guards, and we previously made the case that pattern matching and/or extractors are where guard-style semantics should be pursued. I was wondering if you still have the concern that you previously expressed?

WH: It’s still the wrong question to ask.

DE: Okay, what question should we be asking?

WH: The more basic question is why are we trying to create something which 
is different from both ECMAScript and TypeScript.

DE: By definition, this would be ECMAScript. That wouldn’t be a separate mode. We’re not 

> proposal a different top level syntactic goal. Maybe DRR can clarify the relationship between the results of this proposal and TypeScript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
proposing a different top level syntactic goal. Maybe DRR can clarify the relationship between the results of this proposal and TypeScript.
```

WH: Well, not quite — this would not be ECMAScript because ECMAScript does not 
define any semantics of this.

> DE: Yeah, just like ECMAScript doesn’t define semantics of comments. We’re allowed to add more syntax that doesn’t have runtime semantics. This is to not to add a new top level goal. Do you think that’s a bad idea, and if so, why?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DE: Yes, just like ECMAScript doesn’t define the semantics of comments. We’re allowed to add more syntax that doesn’t have runtime semantics. This is to not to add a new top level goal. Do you think that’s a bad idea, and if so, why?
```

WH: I am uncomfortable with being put on the spot here. I hadn’t added myself to the queue.

MLS: I’m trying to figure out what the use case is, we’re going to delete them away, we’re going 
to erase them. If tooling is going to use it, can’t the tooling delete the type annotations 

> before -- just like what we’re doing, but with Flow and TypeScript and other things do right 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
before -- just like what we’re doing, but what Flow and TypeScript and other things do right 
```

DE: The idea is in a typical case, tools would remove the types, just like minifiers remove comments today.

DRR: Yeah, I think, Michael, your perspective and question here is very legitimate. But the core 
idea is trying to lower the barrier of entry and make it easier to just iterate with JavaScript 
in something that’s very user friendly for very casual development. You know, anecdotal pain 
points that people bring up are I can’t take my TypeScript and paste it into the console and 
try that out and I can’t just run that off the bat. You always do need some sort of 
preprocessing step. The work around that TypeScript has done is to actually parse and 
understand and give error messages in violation of types in jsdoc comments. We try to do a 
good job there, but it’s not as ergonomic and it’s kind of a pain in a lot of cases, and it 
sure would be nice if there were more first class syntaxes to express some of the things that 
you might want to do, right, to express the types that you have, to express that something not-null, things along those lines. So it becomes very cumbersome. Now, the question of can’t the 

> tools just do this is a valid perspective.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you might want to do, right, to express the types that you have, to express that something not-null, things along those lines. So it becomes very cumbersome. Now, the question of "can’t the 
tools just do this?" is a valid perspective.
```

MLS: They’re doing it now, right?

> DRR: Yeah, they are, they are, right?  But, you know, like I said, there a gap in certain runtimes. Node doesn’t have that built in. You could say Node could build it in, but then the browsers don’t have it built in and then you could say a dev tool built into the browser could do, that but there’s still always this lit extra little gap, right?  So if there are ways to alleviate this more and further, then we can also talk about that as alternatives. But as a whole, we’ve also seen that being able to have design-time syntax is extremely valuable and could just make the overall barrier entry for new jobs for developers a lot lower, a lot more approachable. So that’s what we’re trying to explore. And then whenever we bring this to committee, we are interested in hearing, you know, about that, you know, perspective, if it’s valid, if the tools currently serve the needs correctly, things like that. But we also do want to be conscious of the fact that tooling has grown quite a bit in the last few years. Maybe are we’re seeing consolidation and you have a linter and type checker and that and that, can we simplify it a little bit. That’s one of things that we’re hoping to see here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DRR: Yeah, they are, they are, right?  But, you know, like I said, there is a gap in certain runtimes. Node doesn’t have that built in. You could say Node could build it in, but then the browsers don’t have it built in and then you could say a dev tool built into the browser could do, that but there’s still always this lit extra little gap, right?  So if there are ways to alleviate this more and further, then we can also talk about that as alternatives. But as a whole, we’ve also seen that being able to have design-time syntax is extremely valuable and could just make the overall barrier entry for new jobs for developers a lot lower, a lot more approachable. So that’s what we’re trying to explore. And then whenever we bring this to committee, we are interested in hearing, you know, about that, you know, perspective, if it’s valid, if the tools currently serve the needs correctly, things like that. But we also do want to be conscious of the fact that tooling has grown quite a bit in the last few years. Maybe we’re seeing consolidation and you have a linter and type checker and that and that, can we simplify it a little bit. That’s one of things that we’re hoping to see here.
```

MLS: But then it gets to, like, my other concern, is that in a sense, aren’t we picking the winning syntax that will be an ECMAScript?  Even if it’s not comments -- the exact syntax of TypeScript or flow or whatever, we’re picking the -- a winner of a particular tool, aren’t we?

DE: So I’m actually comfortable with that.

MLS: Okay.

DE: Yeah, because we do have the world moving in a particular direction, TypeScript is very, very widely used. We are working to accommodate Flow syntax as well. But the goal is to align with the actual ecosystem that exists. This has been a design goal of TC39 in the past, e.g., in the design of class fields and decorators. The designs related to us working with the actual JavaScript ecosystem that exists to meet their expectations because they have learned that certain things are useful.

MLS: But being an open standard, I think we need to have not just TypeScript, but Flow and others 
at the table.

DE: That’s right, we do have Flow at the table. Flow attended the community call, and we’re 
working through more details of the gaps with flow in the grammar in the repository. So I agree.

MLS: I registered my concerns.

> TAB: Just wanted to say my support for runtime valid syntax. Being able to run the code locally without requiring the build step cycle is extremely valuable for just usability. It’s no different than you’re going to ship a minfied version and you’re going to write your code with nice white space. This is essentially the same deal there. It would be very annoying if it was required that you executed only minifiedJavaScript. So no comment on the exact syntax we’re doing, but on the idea of runtime valid type stuff, it’s very, very convenient for authoring.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TAB: Just wanted to say my support for runtime valid syntax. Being able to run the code locally without requiring the build step cycle is extremely valuable for just usability. It’s no different than when you’re going to ship a minified version and you’re going to write your code with nice white space. This is essentially the same deal there. It would be very annoying if it was required that you executed only minified JavaScript. So no comment on the exact syntax we’re doing, but on the idea of runtime valid type stuff, it’s very, very convenient for authoring.
```

MLS: But minification is a transformation from an ECMAScript compliant code to an ECMAScript 
compliant code. So I don’t think that’s a valid argument.

TAB: That’s exactly what’s going on here with purely erasure semantics for the types. You start 
from valid code to exactly identical runtime behavior valid code. It’s just shorter.

> DE: The idea of the proposal is that we would define types as part of the ECMAScript-compliant standard. We’re not defining a new TypeScript or something like that. I want to mention something that 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DE: The idea of the proposal is that we would define type syntax as part of the ECMAScript-compliant standard. We’re not defining a new TypeScript or something like that. I want to mention something that 
```

> TAB and I had discussed recently. JS and CSS are having this parallel evolution, whereas as of five years ago, ten years ago, had to do so much via tooling. Tooling is still very useful for both languages but not essential as far as the authoring experience goes. Increasingly, it’s not essential, you know, it’s still essential for CSS for scopes, for JavaScript for types, but now we’re working on this. Instead, tooling can be more about optimization, more about checking, and less about adding tons of syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TAB and I had discussed recently. JS and CSS are having this parallel evolution. As of five years ago, ten years ago, they had to do so much via tooling. Tooling is still very useful for both languages but not essential as far as the authoring experience goes. Increasingly it’s not essential. It’s still essential for CSS for scopes, for JavaScript for types, but now we’re working on this. Instead, tooling can be more about optimization, more about checking, and less about adding tons of syntax.
```

> 
> This meeting has an accompanying comment-by-comment written record prepared by IR Broadcast Captioning and TC39 participants. The intention is to capture the various points of view of the committee members, which helps all members evolve proposals based on feedback received and understand the rationale of decisions taken. TC39 participants are encouraged to edit this transcript for accuracy (where the goal is to accurately reflect the intention of the point being made, rather than word-for-word transcription), and to delete comments of theirs which they do not want to be recorded (e.g., due to risk of misunderstanding, inclusion of personal information, or any other reason). Edits may be made during the meeting by editing the Google Doc as it is composed, or afterwards for a period of at least two weeks until the notes are published. If a participant makes a comment in the committee meeting and does not remove it from the notes, they are consenting for it to be published. Participants may ask in the future that their personal data be removed from the published notes.
> 
> 
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
